<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
			<p>At dinner Lillian asked him no questions about his interview with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Crane, and he volunteered no information. She was not surprised, however, when he said he would not stop for a cigar, as he was going over to the Physics laboratory.</p>
			<p>He walked through the park, past the old house and across the north end of the campus, to a building that stood off by itself in a grove of pine-trees. It was constructed of red brick, after an English model. The architect had had a good idea, and he very nearly succeeded in making a good thing, something like the old Smithsonian building in Washington. But after it was begun, the State Legislature had defeated him by grinding down the contractor to cheap execution, and had spoiled everything, outside and in. Ever since it was finished, plumbers and masons and carpenters had been kept busy patching and repairing it. Crane and <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter, both young men then, had wasted weeks of time with the contractors, and had finally gone before the Legislative committee in person to plead for the integrity of that building. But nothing came of all their pains. It was one of many lost causes.</p>
			<p><abbr>St.</abbr> Peter entered the building and went upstairs to a small room at the end of a chain of laboratories. After knocking, he heard the familiar shuffle of Crane’s carpet slippers, and the door opened.</p>
			<p>Crane was wearing a grey cotton coat, shrunk to a rag by washing, though he wasn’t working with fluids or batteries tonight, but at a roll-top desk littered with papers. The room was like any study behind a lecture room; dusty books, dusty files, but no apparatus⁠—except a spirit-lamp and a little saucepan in which the physicist heated water for his cocoa at regular intervals. He was working by the glare of an unshaded electric bulb of high power⁠—the man seemed to have no feeling for comfort of any kind. He asked his visitor to sit down, and to excuse him for a moment while he copied some entries into a notebook.</p>
			<p><abbr>St.</abbr> Peter watched him scribbling with his fountain pen. The hands that were so deft in delicate manipulations were white and soft-looking; the fingers long and loosely hung, stained with chemicals, and blunted at the tips like a violinist’s. His head was square, and the lower part of his face was covered by a reddish, matted beard. His pale eyes and fawn-coloured eyebrows were outbalanced by his mouth, his most conspicuous feature. One always remembered about Crane that unexpected, startling red mouth in a setting of kinky beard. The lips had no modelling, they were as thick at the corners as in the middle, and he spoke through them rather than with them. He seemed painfully conscious of them.</p>
			<p><abbr>St.</abbr> Peter saw no use in beating about the bush. As soon as Crane put down his pen, he remarked that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Crane had been to see him that afternoon. His colleague flushed, took up a large celluloid paper-knife, and began shutting and unshutting his hands about the blade.</p>
			<p>“I want to know exactly how you feel about this, and what the facts are,” <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter began. “We’ve never discussed it before, and there may be things I know nothing about. Did Tom ever say that he meant you to have a share in his profits, if there were any?”</p>
			<p>“No, not exactly. Not exactly that.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Crane moved his shoulders about in his tight coat and looked embarrassed and unhappy. “More than once he said, in a general way, that he hoped it would go, on my account as well as on his own, and that we would use the income for further experiments.”</p>
			<p>“Did he talk much about the possible commercial value of the gas while he was trying to make it?”</p>
			<p>“Not much. No, very seldom. Perhaps not more than half a dozen times in the three years he was working in my laboratory. But whenever he did, he spoke as if there would be something in it for both of us if our gas became remunerative.”</p>
			<p>“Just how much was it ‘our gas,’ Crane?”</p>
			<p>“Strictly speaking, of course, it wasn’t. The idea was Outland’s. He benefited by my criticism, and I often helped him with his experiments. He never acquired a nice laboratory technic. He would fail repeatedly in some perfectly sound experiment because of careless procedure.”</p>
			<p>“Do you think he would have arrived at his results without your help?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Crane was clenching the paper-knife with both hands. “That I cannot say. He was impatient. He might have got discouraged and turned to something else. He would have been much slower in getting his results, at any rate. His conception was right, but very delicate manipulation was necessary, and he was a careless experimentor.”</p>
			<p><abbr>St.</abbr> Peter felt that this was becoming nothing less than cross-examination. He tried to change the tone of it.</p>
			<p>“I want to see you get recognition and compensation for whatever part you had in his experiments, if there’s any way to get it. But you’ve been neglectful, Crane. You haven’t taken the proper steps. Why in the world didn’t you have some understanding with Tom when he was getting his patent? You knew all about it.”</p>
			<p>“It didn’t occur to me then. We’d finished the experiments, and I put them out of my mind. I was trying to concentrate on my own work. His results weren’t as interesting scientifically as I’d expected them to be.”</p>
			<p>“While his manuscripts and formulae were lying here those two years, did you ever make the gas, or give any study to its behaviour?”</p>
			<p>“No, of course not. It’s off my own line, and didn’t interest me.”</p>
			<p>“Then it’s only since this patent has begun to make money that it does interest you?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Crane twisted his shoulders. “Yes. It’s the money.”</p>
			<p>“Heaven knows I’d like to see you get some of it. But why did you put it off so long? Why didn’t you make some claim when you delivered the papers to his executor, since you hadn’t done so before? Why didn’t you bring the matter up to me then, and let me make a claim against the estate for you?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Crane could endure his chair no longer. He began to walk softly about in his slippers, looking at nothing, but, as he talked, picking up objects here and there⁠—drawing-tools, his cocoa-cup, a china cream-pitcher, turning them round and carefully putting them down again, just as he often absently handled pieces of apparatus when he was lecturing.</p>
			<p>“I know,” he said, “appearances are against me. But you must understand my negligence. You know how little opportunity a man has to carry on his own line of investigation here. You know how much time I give to any of my students who are doing honest work. Outland was, of course, the most brilliant pupil I ever had, and I gave him time and thought without stint. Gladly, of course. If he were reaping the rewards of his discovery himself, I’d have nothing to say⁠—though I’ve not the least doubt he would compensate me liberally. But it does not seem right that a stranger should profit, and not those who helped him. You, of course, do profit⁠—indirectly, if not directly. You cannot shut your eyes to the fact that this money, coming into your family, has strengthened your credit and your general security. That’s as it should be. But your claim was less definite than mine. I spent time and strength I could ill afford to spare on the very series of experiments that led to this result. Marsellus gets the benefit of my work as well as of Outland’s. I have certainly been ill-used⁠—and, as you say, it’s difficult to get recompense when I ask for it so late. It’s not to my discredit, certainly, that I didn’t take measures to protect my interests. I never thought of my student’s work in terms of money. There were others who did, and I was not considered,” he concluded bitterly.</p>
			<p>“Why don’t you put in a claim to Marsellus, for your time and expert advice? I think he’d honour it. He is going to live here. He probably doesn’t wish to be more unpopular than a suddenly prosperous man is bound to be, and you have many friends. I believe I can convince him that it would be poor policy to disregard any reasonable demand.”</p>
			<p>“I had thought of that. But my wife’s brother advises a different course.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, yes. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Crane said something of that sort. Well, Crane, if you’re going to law about it, I hope you’ll consult a sound lawyer, and you know as well as I that Homer Bright is not one.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Crane coloured and bridled. “I’m sure you are disinterested, <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter, but, frankly, I think your judgment has been warped by events. You don’t realize how clear the matter is to unprejudiced minds. Though I’m such an unpractical man, I have evidence to rest my claims upon.”</p>
			<p>“The more the better, if you are going to depend on such a windbag as Bright. If you go to law, I’d like to see you win your case.”</p>
			<p><abbr>St.</abbr> Peter said good night, went down the stairs, and out through the dark pine-trees. Evidence, Crane said; probably letters Tom had written him during the winter he was working at Johns Hopkins. Well, there was nothing to be done, unless he could get old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Hutchins to persuade Crane to employ an intelligent lawyer. Homer Bright’s rhetoric might influence a jury in a rape or bigamy case, but it would antagonize a judge in an equity court.</p>
			<p>The Professor took a turn in the park before going home. The interview had depressed him, and he was afraid he might be wakeful. He had never seen his colleague in such an unbecoming light before. Crane was narrow, but he was straight; a man you could count on in the shifty game of college politics. He had never been out to get anything for himself. <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter would have said that nothing about the vulgar success of Outland’s idea could possibly matter to Crane, beyond gratifying his pride as a teacher and friend.</p>
			<p>The park was deserted. The arc-lights were turned off. The leafless trees stood quite motionless in the light of the clear stars. The world was sad to <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter as he looked about him; the lake-shore country flat and heavy, Hamilton small and tight and airless. The university, his new house, his old house, everything around him, seemed insupportable, as the boat on which he is imprisoned seems to a seasick man. Yes, it was possible that the little world, on its voyage among all the stars, might become like that; a boat on which one could travel no longer, from which one could no longer look up and confront those bright rings or revolution.</p>
			<p>He brought himself back with a jerk. Ah, yes, Crane; that was the trouble. If Outland were here tonight, he might say with Mark Antony, <q>My fortunes have corrupted honest men</q>.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
