<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
			<p>The month of March was the dreariest and bleakest of the year in Hamilton, and Louie strove to brighten it by opening a discussion of plans for the summer. He had been hinting for some time that he had a very attractive project up his sleeve, and though he had not succeeded in keeping it from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter, he said nothing to the Professor until one night when they were dining at the Marselluses’. All through dinner Louie kept reminding them of the specialties of this and that Paris restaurant, so that <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter was not altogether unprepared.</p>
			<p>As they left the dining-room, Louie burst out with it. He and Rosamond were to take Doctor and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter to France for the summer. Louie had decided upon the dates, the boat, the itinerary; he was intoxicated with the pleasure of planning.</p>
			<p>“Understand,” he said, “it is to be our excursion, from Hamilton back to Hamilton. We’ll travel in the most ample comfort, but not in magnificence. We’ll go down to Biarritz for a little fashionable life, and stop at Marseilles to see your foster-brother, Charles Thierault. The rest of the summer we’ll lead a scholarly life in Paris. I have my own reasons for wishing you to go along, Professor. The pleasure of your company would be quite enough, but I have also other reasons. I want to see the intellectual side of Paris, and to meet some of the savants and men of letters whom you know. What a shame Gaston Paris is not living! We could very nicely make up a little party at Lapérouse for him. But there are others.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter developed the argument. “Yes, Louie, you and Godfrey can lunch with the scholars while Rosamond and I are shopping.”</p>
			<p>Marsellus looked alarmed. “Not at all, Dearest! It’s to be understood that I always shop with you. I adore the shops in Paris. Besides, we shall want you with us when we lunch with celebrities. When was a savant, and a Frenchman, not eager for the company of two charming ladies at <i xml:lang="fr">déjeuner?</i> And you may have too much of the society of your <i xml:lang="fr">sposi</i>; very nice for you to have variety. You must keep a little engagement book: <i xml:lang="fr">Lundi, déjeuner, M. Emile Faguet. Mercredi, diner, M. Anatole France</i>; and so on.”</p>
			<p><abbr>St.</abbr> Peter chuckled. “I’m afraid you exaggerate the circumference of my social circle, Louie. I haven’t the pleasure of knowing Anatole France.”</p>
			<p>“No matter; we can have M. Paul Bourget for Wednesday.”</p>
			<p>“You can help us, too, about finding things for the house, Papa,” said Rosamond. “We expect to pick up a good many things. The Thieraults ought to know good shops down in the South, where prices have not gone up.”</p>
			<p>“I’m afraid the antiquaries are centralized in Paris. I never saw anything very interesting in Lyons or the Midi. However, they may exist.”</p>
			<p>“Charles Thierault is still interested in a shipping-line that runs to the City of Mexico, isn’t he? He could perfectly well send our purchases from Marseilles to the City of Mexico for us. They would go in without duty, and Louie thinks he can get them across the border as household goods.”</p>
			<p>“That sounds practicable, Rosie. It might be managed.”</p>
			<p>Marsellus laughed and patted his wife’s hand. “Oh-ho, <i xml:lang="fr">cher Papa</i>, you haven’t begun to find how practical we can be!”</p>
			<p>“Well, Louie, it’s a tempting idea, and I’ll think it over. I’ll see whether I can arrange my work.” <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter knew at that moment that he would never be one of this lighthearted expedition, and he hated himself for the ungracious drawing-back that he felt in the region of his diaphragm.</p>
			<p>The family discussed their summer plans all evening. Louie wanted to write at once for rooms at the Meurice, but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter ruled it out as too expensive.</p>
			<p>That night, after he was in bed, <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter tried in vain to justify himself in his inevitable refusal. He liked Paris, and he liked Louie. But one couldn’t do one’s own things in another person’s way; selfish or not, that was the truth. Besides, he would not be needed. He could trust Louie to take every care of Lillian, and nobody could please her more than her son-in-law. <i xml:lang="fr">Beaux-fils</i>, apparently, were meant by Providence to take the husband’s place when husbands had ceased to be lovers. Marsellus never forgot one of the hundred foolish little attentions that Lillian loved. Best of all, he admired her extravagantly, her distinction was priceless to him. Many people admired her, but Louie more than most. That worldliness, that willingness to get the most out of occasions and people, which had developed so strongly in Lillian in the last few years, seemed to Louie as natural and proper as it seemed unnatural to Godfrey. It was an element that had always been in Lillian, and as long as it resulted in mere fastidiousness, was not a means to an end, <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter had liked it, too. He knew it was due to this worldliness, even more than to the fact that his wife had a little money of her own, that she and his daughters had never been drab and a little pathetic, like some of the faculty women. They hadn’t much, but they were never absurd. They never made shabby compromises. If they couldn’t get the right thing, they went without. Usually they had the right thing, and it got paid for, somehow. He couldn’t say they were extravagant; the old house had been funny and bare enough, but there were no ugly things in it.</p>
			<p>Since Rosamond’s marriage to Marsellus, both she and her mother had changed bewilderingly in some respects⁠—changed and hardened. But Louie, who had done the damage, had not damaged himself. It was to him that one appealed⁠—for Augusta, for Professor Crane, for the bruised feelings of people less fortunate. It was less because of Louie than for any other reason that he would refuse this princely invitation.</p>
			<p>He could get out of it without hurting anybody⁠—though he knew Louie would be sorry. He could simply insist that he must work, and that he couldn’t work away from his old study. There were some advantages about being a writer of histories. The desk was a shelter one could hide behind, it was a hole one could creep into.</p>
			<hr epub:type="pagebreak"/>
			<p>When <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter told his family of his decision, Louie was disappointed; but he was respectful, and readily conceded that the Professor’s first duty was to his work. Rosamond was incredulous and piqued; she didn’t see how he could be so ungenerous as to spoil an arrangement which would give pleasure to everyone concerned. His wife looked at him with thoughtful disbelief.</p>
			<p>When they were alone together, she approached the matter more directly than was her wont nowadays.</p>
			<p>“Godfrey,” she said slowly and sadly, “I wonder what it is that makes you draw away from your family. Or who it is.”</p>
			<p>“My dear, are you going to be jealous?”</p>
			<p>“I wish I were going to be. I’d much rather see you foolish about some woman than becoming lonely and inhuman.”</p>
			<p>“Well, the habit of living with ideas grows on one, I suppose, just as inevitably as the more cheerful habit of living with various ladies. There’s something to be said for both.”</p>
			<p>“I think your ideas were best when you were your most human self.”</p>
			<p><abbr>St.</abbr> Peter sighed. “I can’t contradict you there. But I must go on as I can. It is not always May.”</p>
			<p>“You are not old enough for the pose you take. That’s what puzzles me. For so many years you never seemed to grow at all older, though I did. Two years ago you were an impetuous young man. Now you save yourself in everything. You’re naturally warm and affectionate; all at once you begin shutting yourself away from everybody. I don’t think you’ll be happier for it.” Up to this point she had been lecturing him. Now she suddenly crossed the room and sat down on the arm of his chair, looking into his face and twisting up the ends of his military eyebrows with her thumb and middle finger. “Why is it, Godfrey? I can’t see any change in your face, though I watch you so closely. It’s in your mind, in your mood. Something has come over you. Is it merely that you know too much, I wonder? Too much to be happy? You were always the wisest person in the world. What is it, can’t you tell me?”</p>
			<p>“I can’t altogether tell myself, Lillian. It’s not wholly a matter of the calendar. It’s the feeling that I’ve put a great deal behind me, where I can’t go back to it again⁠—and I don’t really wish to go back. The way would be too long and too fatiguing. Perhaps, for a home-staying man, I’ve lived pretty hard. I wasn’t willing to slight anything⁠—you, or my desk, or my students. And now I seem to be tremendously tired. One pays, coming or going. A man has got only just so much in him; when it’s gone he slumps. Even the first Napoleon did.” They both laughed. That was an old joke⁠—the Professor’s darkest secret. At the font he had been christened Napoleon Godfrey <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter. There had always been a Napoleon in the family, since a remote grandfather got his discharge from the Grande Armée. Godfrey had abbreviated his name in Kansas, and even his daughters didn’t know what it had been originally.</p>
			<p>“I think, you know,” he told his wife as he rose to go to bed, “that I’ll get my second wind. But for the present I don’t want anything very stimulating. Paris is too beautiful, and too full of memories.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
